docs/content/en/docs/setup.md, before:

---
title: "Setup"
weight: 20
description: Set up piv-agent to work with your hardware.
---

## Hardware

{{% alert title="Warning" color="warning" %}}
This procedure resets the state of the PIV applet and wipes any existing keys from PIV slots.
{{% /alert %}}

This procedure is only required once per hardware security device.
Performing it a second time will reset the keys on the PIV applet of the device.
It will not make any changes to other functionality the device may have, such as WebAuthn.

By default, `piv-agent` uses four slots on your hardware security device to set up three signing keys, and one decrypting key.
The signing keys each have different [touch policies](https://docs.yubico.com/yesdk/users-manual/application-piv/pin-touch-policies.html): never required, cached (for 15 seconds), and always.
The touch policy for the decrypting key is "never required".

The three signing keys are used for both SSH and GPG signing.
The decrypting key is only used for GPG.

These default policies are very roughly based on the [Yubikey certificate slot usage description](https://developers.yubico.com/PIV/Introduction/Certificate_slots.html).
They are designed to facilitate practical use of the hardware security device.

It is highly recommended to use the default multi-key setup procedure as this has had the most usability testing.

```
# find the name of the hardware security devices (cards)
piv-agent list
# generate new keys
piv-agent setup --pin=123456 --card='Yubico YubiKey FIDO+CCID 01 00' --reset-security-key
# view newly generated keys (SSH only by default)
piv-agent list
```

## SSH

### List keys

List your hardware SSH keys:

```
piv-agent list
```

Add the public SSH key with the touch policy you want from the list, to any SSH service.

### Set `SSH_AUTH_SOCK`

Export the `SSH_AUTH_SOCK` variable in your shell.

```
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK=$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/piv-agent/ssh.socket
```

### Prefer keys on the hardware security device

If you don't already have one, it's a good idea to generate an `ed25519` keyfile and add that to all SSH services too for redundancy.
`piv-agent` will automatically load and use `~/.ssh/id_ed25519` as a fallback.

By default, `ssh` will offer [keyfiles it finds on disk](https://manpages.debian.org/testing/openssh-client/ssh_config.5.en.html#IdentityFile) _before_ those from the agent.
This is a problem because `piv-agent` is designed to offer keys from the hardware token first, and only fall back to local keyfiles if token keys are refused.
To get `ssh` to ignore local keyfiles and only talk to `piv-agent`, add this line to your `ssh_config`, for all hosts:

```
IdentityFile /dev/null
```

## GPG

### Export fallback cryptographic keys

Private GPG keys to be used by `piv-agent` must be exported to the directory `~/.gnupg/piv-agent.secring/`.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
This step requires `gpg-agent` to be running, not `piv-agent`.
See the [FAQ](../../docs/faq) for how to switch between the two services.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
If your private key is encrypted using a password (it should be!), the encryption is retained during export.
The key is still stored encrypted in the exported keyfile - it's just converted into a standard OpenPGP format that `piv-agent` can read.
{{% /alert %}}

```
# example
# set umask for user-only permissions
umask 77
mkdir -p ~/.gnupg/piv-agent.secring
gpg --export-secret-key 0xB346A434C7652C02 > ~/.gnupg/piv-agent.secring/art@example.com.gpg
```

### Disable gpg-agent

It is not possible to set a custom path for the `gpg-agent` socket in a similar manner to `ssh-agent`.
Instead `gpg-agent` always uses a hard-coded path for its socket.
In order for `piv-agent` to work with `gpg`, it sets up a socket in this same default location.
To avoid conflict over this path, `gpg-agent` should be disabled.

This is how you can disable `gpg-agent` on Debian/Ubuntu:

* Add `no-autostart` to `~/.gnupg/gpg.conf`.
* `systemctl --user disable --now gpg-agent.socket gpg-agent.service; pkill gpg-agent`

Other platforms may have slightly different instructions - PRs welcome.

### Import public cryptographic keys from the security hardware

Before any private GPG keys on the hardware dvice can be used, `gpg` requires their public keys to be imported.
This structure of a GPG public key contains a [User ID packet](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4880#section-5.11), which must be signed by the associated _private key_.

The `piv-agent list` command can synthesize a public key for the private key stored on the security hardware device.
Listing a GPG key via `piv-agent list --key-formats=gpg` will require a touch to perform signing on the keys associated with those slots (due to the User ID packet).
You should provide a name and email which will be embedded in the synthesized public key (see `piv-agent --help list`).

```
# example
piv-agent list --key-formats=ssh,gpg --pgp-name='Art Vandelay' --pgp-email='art@example.com'
```

Paste the public key(s) you would like to use into a `key.asc` file, and run `gpg --import key.asc`.

## GPG Advanced

If you have followed the setup instructions to this point you should have a functional `gpg-agent` backed by a PIV hardware device.
The following instructions allow deeper integration of the hardware with existing GPG keys and workflows.

### Add cryptographic key stored in hardware as a GPG signing subkey

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
There is a [bug](https://dev.gnupg.org/T5555) in certain versions of GnuPG which doesn't allow ECDSA keys to be added as signing subkeys.
This is unfortunate since signing is much more useful than decryption.
You'll need a verion of GnuPG where that bug is fixed for this procedure to work.
{{% /alert %}}

Adding a `piv-agent` OpenPGP key as a signing subkey of an existing OpenPGP key is a convenient way to integrate a hardware security device with your existing `gpg` workflow.
This allows you to do things like sign `git` commits using your Yubikey, while keeping the same OpenPGP key ID.
Adding a subkey requires cross-signing between the master key and sub key, so you need to export the master secret key of your existing OpenPGP key as described above to make it available to `piv-agent`.

`gpg` will choose the _newest_ available subkey to perform an action. So it will automatically prefer a newly added `piv-agent` subkey over any existing keyfile subkeys, but fall back to keyfiles if e.g. the Yubikey is not plugged in.

See the [GPG Walkthrough](../../docs/gpg-walkthrough) for an example of this procedure.

Commit message:

chore: add setup-slots to setup documentation

docs/content/en/docs/setup.md, after:

---
title: "Setup"
weight: 20
description: Set up piv-agent to work with your hardware.
---

## Hardware

### Default setup

{{% alert title="Warning" color="warning" %}}
This procedure resets the state of the PIV applet and wipes any existing keys from _all_ PIV slots.
{{% /alert %}}

This procedure is only required once per hardware security device.
Performing it a second time will reset the keys on the PIV applet of the device.
It will not make any changes to other functionality the device may have, such as WebAuthn.

By default, `piv-agent` uses four slots on your hardware security device to set up three signing keys, and one decrypting key.
The signing keys each have different [touch policies](https://docs.yubico.com/yesdk/users-manual/application-piv/pin-touch-policies.html): never required, cached (for 15 seconds), and always.
The touch policy for the decrypting key is "never required".

The three signing keys are used for both SSH and GPG signing.
The decrypting key is only used for GPG.

These default policies are very roughly based on the [Yubikey certificate slot usage description](https://developers.yubico.com/PIV/Introduction/Certificate_slots.html).
They are designed to facilitate practical use of the hardware security device.

It is highly recommended to use the default multi-key setup procedure as this has had the most usability testing.

```
# find the name of the hardware security devices (cards)
piv-agent list
# generate new keys
piv-agent setup --pin=123456 --card='Yubico YubiKey FIDO+CCID 01 00' --reset-security-key
# view newly generated keys (SSH only by default)
piv-agent list
```

### Single slot setup

{{% alert title="Warning" color="warning" %}}
`piv-agent` has been designed to work best with the default setup.
Only set up single slots if you know what you are doing.

This action can be destructive.
If you reset a slot which already contains a key, that key will be lost.
{{% /alert %}}

It is possible to set up a single PIV slot on your hardware device without resetting the device.
This means that you target a single slot to set up a key if the slot has not been set up yet, or reset a key if the slot already contains one.
Other PIV slots will not be affected, and will retain their existing keys.

For example this command will reset just the decrypting slot on your Yubikey:

```
piv-agent setup-slots --card="Yubico YubiKey FIDO+CCID 01 00" --pin=123456 --decrypting-key --reset-slots
```

See the interactive help for more usage details:

```
piv-agent setup-slots --help
```

## SSH

### List keys

List your hardware SSH keys:

```
piv-agent list
```

Add the public SSH key with the touch policy you want from the list, to any SSH service.

### Set `SSH_AUTH_SOCK`

Export the `SSH_AUTH_SOCK` variable in your shell.

```
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK=$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/piv-agent/ssh.socket
```

### Prefer keys on the hardware security device

If you don't already have one, it's a good idea to generate an `ed25519` keyfile and add that to all SSH services too for redundancy.
`piv-agent` will automatically load and use `~/.ssh/id_ed25519` as a fallback.

By default, `ssh` will offer [keyfiles it finds on disk](https://manpages.debian.org/testing/openssh-client/ssh_config.5.en.html#IdentityFile) _before_ those from the agent.
This is a problem because `piv-agent` is designed to offer keys from the hardware token first, and only fall back to local keyfiles if token keys are refused.
To get `ssh` to ignore local keyfiles and only talk to `piv-agent`, add this line to your `ssh_config`, for all hosts:

```
IdentityFile /dev/null
```

## GPG

### Export fallback cryptographic keys

Private GPG keys to be used by `piv-agent` must be exported to the directory `~/.gnupg/piv-agent.secring/`.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
This step requires `gpg-agent` to be running, not `piv-agent`.
See the [FAQ](../../docs/faq) for how to switch between the two services.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
If your private key is encrypted using a password (it should be!), the encryption is retained during export.
The key is still stored encrypted in the exported keyfile - it's just converted into a standard OpenPGP format that `piv-agent` can read.
{{% /alert %}}

```
# example
# set umask for user-only permissions
umask 77
mkdir -p ~/.gnupg/piv-agent.secring
gpg --export-secret-key 0xB346A434C7652C02 > ~/.gnupg/piv-agent.secring/art@example.com.gpg
```

### Disable gpg-agent

It is not possible to set a custom path for the `gpg-agent` socket in a similar manner to `ssh-agent`.
Instead `gpg-agent` always uses a hard-coded path for its socket.
In order for `piv-agent` to work with `gpg`, it sets up a socket in this same default location.
To avoid conflict over this path, `gpg-agent` should be disabled.

This is how you can disable `gpg-agent` on Debian/Ubuntu:

* Add `no-autostart` to `~/.gnupg/gpg.conf`.
* `systemctl --user disable --now gpg-agent.socket gpg-agent.service; pkill gpg-agent`

Other platforms may have slightly different instructions - PRs welcome.

### Import public cryptographic keys from the security hardware

Before any private GPG keys on the hardware dvice can be used, `gpg` requires their public keys to be imported.
This structure of a GPG public key contains a [User ID packet](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4880#section-5.11), which must be signed by the associated _private key_.

The `piv-agent list` command can synthesize a public key for the private key stored on the security hardware device.
Listing a GPG key via `piv-agent list --key-formats=gpg` will require a touch to perform signing on the keys associated with those slots (due to the User ID packet).
You should provide a name and email which will be embedded in the synthesized public key (see `piv-agent --help list`).

```
# example
piv-agent list --key-formats=ssh,gpg --pgp-name='Art Vandelay' --pgp-email='art@example.com'
```

Paste the public key(s) you would like to use into a `key.asc` file, and run `gpg --import key.asc`.

## GPG Advanced

If you have followed the setup instructions to this point you should have a functional `gpg-agent` backed by a PIV hardware device.
The following instructions allow deeper integration of the hardware with existing GPG keys and workflows.

### Add cryptographic key stored in hardware as a GPG signing subkey

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
There is a [bug](https://dev.gnupg.org/T5555) in certain versions of GnuPG which doesn't allow ECDSA keys to be added as signing subkeys.
This is unfortunate since signing is much more useful than decryption.
You'll need a verion of GnuPG where that bug is fixed for this procedure to work.
{{% /alert %}}

Adding a `piv-agent` OpenPGP key as a signing subkey of an existing OpenPGP key is a convenient way to integrate a hardware security device with your existing `gpg` workflow.
This allows you to do things like sign `git` commits using your Yubikey, while keeping the same OpenPGP key ID.
Adding a subkey requires cross-signing between the master key and sub key, so you need to export the master secret key of your existing OpenPGP key as described above to make it available to `piv-agent`.

`gpg` will choose the _newest_ available subkey to perform an action. So it will automatically prefer a newly added `piv-agent` subkey over any existing keyfile subkeys, but fall back to keyfiles if e.g. the Yubikey is not plugged in.

See the [GPG Walkthrough](../../docs/gpg-walkthrough) for an example of this procedure.
